+++
title = "How Employee Ownership Benefits Business"
subtitle = "Employee owned companies thrive relative to their peers."
tags = ['employeeownership','ESOPs','Cooperatives']
date = 2023-10-10

# For description meta tag
description = "Employee owned companies thrive relative to their peers."

# Comment next line and the default banner wil be used.
banner = '/img/howeobenefitsbusiness.jpg'

+++

![](/img/howeobenefitsbusiness.jpg)

Research suggests that employee ownership offers substantial benefits
both to businesses and employee owners. Businesses enjoy increased
worker productivity, investment, company growth, and greater resiliency
against market trends. Employee owners, meanwhile, often benefit from
improved subjective well-being and greater wealth relative to their
non-owner peers. This blog post explores these myriad benefits in more
detail.

***A. Employee ownership increases productivity.***

Businesses strive to promote employee productivity. Given a constant
number of labor hours input it would always be preferable to produce a
higher output of goods and services. Many corporations take great
strides to increase productivity, such as equipping workers with the
latest technology or providing caffeinated beverages free of charge. Any
business interested in further increasing the productivity of their
workers should consider converting to employee-ownership. A
meta-analysis of 11 empirical studies shows that employee ownership
boosts worker productivity by 4%.[^1] This increased productivity had
substantial ramifications for the companies' bottom lines. While precise
gains varied by industry, on average, this increase in worker
productivity resulted in increased profit margins of between 10-12%.
Another, larger meta-analysis of 56,984 firms found that employee
ownership has a positive, statistically significant relationship to firm
performance.[^2] Given the hyper-competitive landscape many firms
operate in, these significant increases may be the difference between a
company floundering or flourishing.

In addition to these productivity increases, employee owners often
contribute to various cost-cutting measures which lead to further
efficiencies. The employee ownership structure aligns the incentives of
workers and their employer, such that when the business is thriving
employee owners directly benefit. Workers recognize this connection, and
will often alter their behavior accordingly. It's no surprise that many
employee owned businesses are renowned for providing exceptional
customer service.[^3] Additionally, employee owners often take steps to
reduce energy use and waste, again recognizing the direct link between
business performance and their worker wealth. Why are these prosocial
behaviors less common in traditionally structured businesses? As
Economist Thomas Friedman recognized "in the history of the
world, no one has ever washed a rental car".[^4]

***B. Employee ownership increases investment, company growth, and resilience.***

Importantly, productivity and profit margin gain attributable to
employee-ownership are often utilized by employee-owners to ensure the
long-term vitality of their enterprise. Relative to corporations with
traditional ownership structures, employee-owned businesses invest a
higher percentage of profits to ensure future growth. This increased
investment leads to improved company growth over time.

In addition to improvements in company investment and growth, employee
owned enterprises exhibit greater resilience to economic downturns.
During economic downturns, firms may euphemistically "right size", or
fire employees en masse, in order to minimize their losses. This
restructuring may have positive effects on the company[']{dir="rtl"}s
bottom line, but can prove disastrous to individual employees and the
national economy. For example, during the Great Recession of 2008,
roughly 8.8 million people lost their jobs.[^5] These job losses further
suppress consumer demand and contribute to further decline of an already
weakened economy. In this vicious cycle, when consumer confidence
decreases and household spending lowers, businesses experience even
lower demand for their goods and services which may encourage further
layoffs.

Interestingly, employee owned businesses have been shown to resist this
trend. Given a 1% increase in the national unemployment rate, firms
without any employee ownership will decrease employment by 3%.
Alternatively, broad based employee owned businesses decrease employment
by only 1.7%, suggesting that they are more willing to retain workers
even during periods of high unemployment such as recessions.[^6]  

The commitment shown to employee-owners during recessions contributes to
the ability of the firm to survive long term. In fact, studies have
shown that from 1988-1999 70% of ESOP companies survived relative to
only 55% of comparable non-ESOP companies.[^7]  

**C. Conclusion**

Employee ownership is not only a more just way of organizing work, but
also a smart and profitable one. Research shows that employee-owned
businesses outperform their conventional counterparts in terms of
productivity, profitability, investment, growth, and resilience.
Employee owners also enjoy higher levels of well-being, wealth, and
satisfaction. By converting to employee ownership, businesses can create
a win-win situation for themselves and their workers, as well as
contribute to a more equitable and sustainable economy. Employee
ownership is not a utopian dream, but a viable and proven alternative to
the dominant model of corporate capitalism. It is time for more
businesses to embrace employee ownership and unleash its potential
benefits.

[^1]: O\'Boyle, Ernest H., Pankaj C. Patel, and Erik Gonzalez-Mule.
    *Employee Ownership and Firm Performance: A Meta-Analysis*. Wiley
    Online Library. Human Resource Management Journal. June 24, 2016.
    [[https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/1748-8583.12115]](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/1748-8583.12115).

[^2]: Kurtulus, Fidan Ana, and Douglas L. Kruse. The Effect of Employee
    Ownership on Employment Stability and Firm Survival During the Past
    Two Recessions. Report. Employment Research Newsletter, W.E. Upjohn
    Institute for Employment Research. 1st ed. Vol. 24.

    [[https://doi.org/10.17848/1075-8445.24(1)-2]](https://doi.org/10.17848/1075-8445.24(1)-2)

[^3]: Juckett, Aaron, and CPC. \"The One-Stop ESOP Blog.\" Southwest
    Airlines Employee Ownership Culture.
    [[https://www.esoppartners.com/blog/bid/157768/21st-Annual-ESOP-Economic-Performance-Survey-EPS]](https://www.esoppartners.com/blog/bid/157768/21st-Annual-ESOP-Economic-Performance-Survey-EPS).

[^4]: Garson. \"No One Washes a Rental Car.\" Quote Investigator.
    [[https://quoteinvestigator.com/2010/06/21/wash-rental/]](https://quoteinvestigator.com/2010/06/21/wash-rental/).

[^5]: \"Chart Book: The Legacy of the Great Recession.\" Center on
    Budget and Policy Priorities. November 06, 2018.
    [[https://www.cbpp.org/research/economy/chart-book-the-legacy-of-the-great-recession]](https://www.cbpp.org/research/economy/chart-book-the-legacy-of-the-great-recession).

[^6]: Kurtulus, Fidan Ana, and Douglas L. Kruse. The Effect of Employee
    Ownership on Employment Stability and Firm Survival During the Past
    Two Recessions. Report. Employment Research Newsletter, W.E. Upjohn
    Institute for Employment Research. 1st ed. Vol. 24.

    [[https://doi.org/10.17848/1075-8445.24(1)-2]](https://doi.org/10.17848/1075-8445.24(1)-2)

[^7]: Wiefek, Nancy. \"Key Studies on Employee Ownership and Corporate
    Performance.\" How an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) Works.
    [[https://www.nceo.org/articles/studies-employee-ownership-corporate-performance]](https://www.nceo.org/articles/studies-employee-ownership-corporate-performance).
