+++
title = "Challenges Facing Employee Owneed Businesses"
subtitle = "Employee owned companies face several unique challenges."
tags = ['employeeownership','ESOPs','Cooperatives']
date = 2024-02-06

# For description meta tag
description = "Employee owned companies face several unique challenges."

# Comment next line and the default banner wil be used.
banner = '/img/B11Image.jpg'

+++

![](/img/B11Image.jpg)

***A. Financing***

One of the primary challenges facing employee owned businesses is a lack
of financing to transition or sustain an employee ownership business
structure. Financial institutions often have little experience
transitioning businesses from a traditional ownership structure to an
ESOP, and so may be unable to facilitate the financing.[^1] Many
employee ownership transitions are facilitated by boutique firms which
specialize in ESOP financing. Unfortunately, having to rely on these
smaller firms with niche expertise may result in interested companies
having to pay higher interest rates than if they had been able to borrow
from a larger, more traditional financial institution.

Financing may remain a challenge even after a business has transitioned
to an employee ownership structure. This is due to incongruences between
the time horizons of potential future investors and worker owners.[^2]
Employee owned businesses typically operate with a longer time horizon
than a typical business, as each employee owner is incentivized to
maximize returns over the long term. Alternatively, executive
compensation in publicly traded companies is often tied to the
short-term movement of share price, which is largely determined by
quarterly or annual financial reports. This structure incentives
managers to cut costs, and potentially corners, in the short term so as
to maximize profits, share prices, and their own bonuses. Risk averse
investors in established businesses typically prefer to see returns over
a shorter time period. When a venture capitalist or activist hedge fund
manager are seeking to invest, they would naturally target a firm that
could offer the highest return in the shortest period of time. This
profit-orientation conveniently dovetails with the way most
traditionally structured publicly traded corporations are managed, but
contrasts sharply with the longer time horizons of employee owned
businesses. Subsequently, employee-owned businesses may find it
challenging to secure financing to expand their operations given this
investor time-horizon bias.

***B. Leadership Challenges and Efficiency Concerns***

Employee owned businesses may struggle to develop a true ownership
culture, which would prevent the business from realizing the full
benefits of worker ownership. In addition to being a type of business
structure, worker-ownership constitutes a shared mindset. For it to be
truly effective, employees must collectively accept their agency and
feel empowered to act to improve the day-to-day operations of their
business. This ownership mindset is positively correlated with the
degree to which the business is worker-owned.[^3] Thus, granting
employees a paltry percentage of ownership via an ESOP is unlikely to be
sufficient to transition workers to an ownership mindset. In order to
encourage workers to believe in the benefits of employee-ownership, they
must actually be owners in some meaningful sense.

Even if workers are granted a sufficient share of the company so as to
legitimately be considered worker-owners, the company may still be
plagued by several psychological challenges. First, employee
expectations about what employee ownership entails may color their
satisfaction with the structure and thus their productivity.[^4] If
companies fail to meet employee expectations about ownership, employees
may become disenchanted by the prospects of ownership and become less
motivated to participate as true owners. Consequently, it is paramount
that companies transitioning to worker-ownership have clear guidelines
of what, precisely, employee-ownership may entail.

Even with intentional expectation setting and a high degree of literal
employee-ownership, certain workers may still create organizational
slack via the free-rider phenomenon. This example of market failure may
arise when certain employee-owners are content to reap the benefits of
ownership without expending the additional time and effort required to
be true owners. Unlike their more invested peers, they may neglect to
continually assess business processes in search for efficiency
improvements. If this passive participation in the employee-ownership
structure became pervasive, it could potentially undermine the entire
organization. Â 

***C. Disparity in Ownership Levels***

Tensions in employee-owned businesses could arise when there are extreme
discrepancies in ownership level across employees. This challenge can be
particularly acute if employee-owned businesses sustain rapid growth.
For example, the initial members of an ESOP may have been granted a
large share of ownership relative to later hires. While it is common for
ESOPS to allocate shares based on compensation, employee tenure and
seniority, when the process is highly inequitable it poses a strong
challenge to feelings of joint ownership and collectivism. Indeed, under
the most extreme examples, an employee-owned business may come to
resemble a traditionally structured corporation, with a small minority
of owners controlling the vast majority of the company's
shares. Under this scenario, the employee-owned business will
likely not enjoy any of the usual benefits of employee ownership.

[^1]: Postlethwaite, Robert. \"Employee Ownership: Financial
    Challenges.\" The Guardian. July 22, 2013.
    [[https://www.theguardian.com/social-enterprise-network/2013/jul/22/co-operatives-and-mutuals-social-enterprise-blog]{.underline}](https://www.theguardian.com/social-enterprise-network/2013/jul/22/co-operatives-and-mutuals-social-enterprise-blog).

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Vanderslice, Ginny. Ownership Advantage: Leadership Challenges in
    ESOP Companies. Philadelphia, PA: Praxis Consulting Group, 2014.

[^4]: Buckley, M. Ronald, Donald B. Fedor, John G. Veres, Danielle S.
    Wiese, and Shawn M. Carraher. \"Investigating Newcomer Expectations
    and Job-related Outcomes.\" *Journal of Applied Psychology*83, no. 3
    (1998): 452-61. doi:10.1037//0021-9010.83.3.452.
