+++
title = "The Bar Exam Should be Abolished"
subtitle = "An argument to increase access to justice."
tags = ['Equity']
date = 2020-06-25

# For description meta tag
description = "An argument to increase access to justice."

# Comment next line and the default banner wil be used.
# banner = 'img/MABarsq.jpeg'

+++

## 

As the Spring semester draws to a close, thousands of soon-to-be law school graduates
across the country will shift their attention to the final hurdle to become a lawyer: the bar exam. Unfortunately, this ultimate barrier to practice is designed to arbitrarily exclude qualified individuals from the profession, bears no rational relationship to the actual practice of law, and is harmful to consumers. The bar exam should be abolished because it would increase access to the profession, decrease legal costs for consumers, and have little to no adverse effect on the quality of legal services provided by the market.
The bar exam, and the legal profession generally in America, is predicated on the exclusion of women, people of color, religious minorities, and immigrants. For nearly the first hundred years of this country’s history the path to becoming a lawyer mirrored that of other professions: apprentice with an established practitioner.[^]: 

: Goforth, C. (2015). Why the Bar Examination Fails to Raise the Bar. School of Law Faculty Publications and Presentations. Retrieved from https://scholarworks.uark.edu/lawpub/6. 

Even after Isaac Royall Jr., a wealthy slave-owner, donated funds to create Harvard Law School in 1817, most attorneys were still minted via the personal connections and nepotism encouraged by the apprenticeship model.2 A written bar exam wasn’t even administered in the United States until Massachusetts developed one in 1855.3 Eventually, the combination of graduating from an accredited law school and completing a written bar exam became prerequisites to practice.
1 Goforth, C. (2015). Why the Bar Examination Fails to Raise the Bar. School of Law Faculty Publications and Presentations. Retrieved from https://scholarworks.uark.edu/lawpub/6
2 Isaac Royall Jr.: Slave master, Harvard Law School Benefactor. Harvard University Press Blog. (n.d.). Retrieved April 20, 2022, from https://harvardpress.typepad.com/hup_publicity/2015/11/isaac-royall-jr-slave-master-harvard- law-school-benefactor.html
3 Gaiennie, A., Amy Gaiennie Amy Gaiennie is the managing member of Gaiennie Law Office, & Facebook, A. L. • W. • L. •. (2021, November 2). Evolution of the bar exam. ABA for Law Students. Retrieved April 20, 2022, from https://abaforlawstudents.com/2021/11/04/evolution-of-the-bar-exam/
  
While these requirements facially appear to be more egalitarian than an apprenticeship system obviously conditioned on personal connections, in fact they continued the exclusionary history of law in America. According to the U.S. Census, of the 160,605 practicing lawyers in the United States in 1930 only 1,247 were black.4 Women were similarly excluded from the profession, with top schools such as Yale and Harvard not formally admitting women until 1919 and 1950 respectively.5 Today, graduating from an accredited law school and completing the bar remain formidable barriers for any aspiring attorney. Bar prep courses typically costs thousands of dollars and require hundreds of hours of dedicated study time. Recent grads are forced to prepare for the exam as though it were a full-time job. It is particularly challenging for low- income graduates to manage these financial and time impositions. Indeed, those without significant family support may consider that the average debt of a law school graduate is $164,742 while the median salary is only $70,000 and choose to forego the profession well before they reach the final step of bar completion.6
Of course, those who choose to attend law school must then complete a bar exam that bears no rational relationship to lawyer competence before they are deemed “competent” to practice. After three years of schooling, tens of law school exams, and countless hours of studying, the aspiring attorney will only be deemed fit to practice on the results of a two-day written examination. The bar covers such diverse topics as constitutional law, business
4 Hylton, B. J. G. (2020, February 14). Black lawyers in the 1930s. Marquette University Law School Faculty Blog. Retrieved April 20, 2022, from https://law.marquette.edu/facultyblog/2012/05/black-lawyers-in-the-1930s/
5 A timeline of women at Yale. 50WomenAtYale150. (n.d.). Retrieved April 20, 2022, from https://celebratewomen.yale.edu/history/timeline-women-yale
6 Shinn, L. (2021, December 21). Average law school debt. The Balance. Retrieved April 20, 2022, from https://www.thebalance.com/average-law-school-debt-5184944
 
associations, trusts and estates, criminal procedure, torts, and evidence.7 It is plausible that during some bygone era of legal practice in America it was necessary for the “small-town” lawyer to have some minimal competency in every field of law. Yet contemporary legal practice has kowtowed to the edict of capitalism: specialize. Most modern lawyers will focus their practice on one or perhaps two niches of doctrinal law. Indeed, a single lawyer offering the full suite of legal services tested on the bar would arguably violate ABA Rule 1.1 on competence.8 Surely, many law school graduates’ careers will touch upon something that’s tested on the bar. Even so, the bar’s testing of this subject is at best redundant to what that student already studied in law school or would learn on the job.
In addition to being an arbitrary barrier to the practice of law, the bar is also harmful to consumers. The legal community, much like a cartel, enjoys price premiums for its services due to its limited size. The higher the barriers to entry, the fewer attorneys will enter practice. This relatively low labor supply restricts consumer choice and allows attorneys to impose excessive costs for their services. The bar exam is a critical component of this unnecessary edifice. Graduating from a four-year college and three-year law school is an enormous barrier which sufficiently excludes the most disenfranchised members of American society from even considering becoming a lawyer. Of those who make the significant investment to attend law school, roughly 20% of first-time test-takers will then fail the bar and are thus still excluded from legal practice.9
7 Preparing for the MBE. NCBE. (n.d.). Retrieved April 20, 2022, from https://www.ncbex.org/exams/mbe/preparing/
8ABA Model Rules of professional conduct - Rule 1.1 Competence . Americanbar.org. (n.d.). Retrieved April 20, 2022, from https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct /rule_1_1_competence/
9 Rubino, K. (2020, February 19). Bar passage rates for first-time test takers soars! Above the Law. Retrieved April 20, 2022, from https://abovethelaw.com/2020/02/bar-passage-rates-for-first-time-test-takers-soars/
 
Surely, some may argue that bar exam is a necessary barrier that prevents unqualified law school graduates from practicing law. This argument suffers from two deficiencies. First, it adopts a paternalistic view of consumers. Much of the American economy is predicated on free market principles meant to maximize individual choice. Regulations curtail this market activity in ways that are meant to protect consumers and promote efficiency. Unfortunately, the bar exam does little to signal to consumers that an attorney is suitable to meet their legal needs. Second, removing bar-passage as a prerequisite to practice would not materially decrease the quality of legal services being supplied to the public, because the exam bears little or no relationship to the actual practice of law. Consumers ought to be trusted to find a legal practitioner suitable to their needs; whether that person passed a two-day exam on a laundry list of legal topics is irrelevant.
If the American legal community wants to turn the page on its racist, sexist, and classist history, then the bar exam must be abolished. This simple act will increase access to the profession while not adversely impacting the interests of the public. The barriers to join the legal profession are more than steep enough. It is time the legal cartel loosened its grip, opened its doors to more diverse members, and acknowledged that doing so is necessary to meet the legal needs of Americans.

