+++
title = "Scientific Uncertainity and Climate Action"
subtitle = "Is it reasonable to take drastic policy steps to combat climate change given scientific uncertainity?"
tags = ['Climaterisk']
date = 2017-04-24

# For description meta tag
description = "Is it reasonable to take drastic policy steps to combat climate change given scientific uncertainity?"

# Comment next line and the default banner wil be used.
 banner = 'img/meltingearthblog.jpeg'

+++

It is unreasonable to suggest that there is significant scientific
uncertainty surrounding global warming. Consequently, it would be
nothing short of reckless for humanity to refuse to implement drastic
policy changes to address the causal relationship between our actions
and the Earth's changing climate. When asked what is the most pressing
challenge facing the United States,Â  presidential candidate Bernie
Sanders coolly replied climate change.[^1] This response surely struck
many viewers of the debate as odd, given that one of the two major
American political parties maintains that climate change is not
occurring, or if it is, has nothing to do with anthropogenic causes.
Indeed, the current president of the United States has suggested that
climate change is a hoax created by the Chinese, while other members of
the Republican party are demur on a subject they claim to be incapable
of comprehending as non-scientists.[^2] Despite this American political
uncertainty, there is a broad scientific consensus suggesting humans are
culpable for our planet\'s changing climate. In the face of this
reality, many nations have developed solutions the United States
government may consider "drastic" to cope with these changes. The
American federal government has remained reluctant to join the
international community in their efforts to mitigate fossil fuel
emissions. Despite this, local autonomy under federalism has allowed
certain states to implement strong environmental policies in adherence
with international standards outlined under the Paris Climate Agreement.
Given the potential catastrophe of ignoring climate change predictions
from a broad consensus of scientists it would be ludicrously reckless
for the United States not to pursue more serious measures to combat
global warming. Moreover, as states such as Massachusetts and California
show, the implementation of these "green" policies may actually promote
economic resiliency, public health, and general well being.

While the Earth's climate is continuously in flux, recent trends suggest
that an exorbitant rise in atmospheric greenhouse gases has resulted in
persistent and consistent global warming. These aptly named gases,
including CO2 and CH4, trap solar energy within the atmosphere thereby
exacerbating our atmosphere's ability to act as a sort of greenhouse for
our planet. The recent increase in Carbon Dioxide illustrates how
humans, particularly after the industrial revolution, are responsible
for these increases. For the first time in 400,000 years, Carbon Dioxide
composes more than 400 parts per million of the Earth's atmosphere.[^3]
This 400 ppm threshold is dramatically higher than previous interglacial
periods, when the atmosphere contained only 280 ppm CO2.[^4] In addition
to the increased combustion of fossil fuels post industrialization, the
widespread clear cutting of forests for agricultural purposes has
largely destroyed our planet's natural Carbon sink. These trends have
had the cumulative effect of gradually raising Earth's average
temperature, which has increased by roughly one degree centigrade over
the last century.[^5] As average temperatures rise, a vicious positive
feedback loop is initiated whereby permafrost gradually melts, which
releases more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, which in turn trap
more solar energy in our atmosphere. The melting of the polar ice caps
also exacerbates this trend, for the liquid water is able to absorb more
solar radiation than the reflective ice, which further increases water
temperatures and thus melts more ice. These scientific facts are hardly
controversial, as 97% of climate scientists agree that this is the
current reality of climate change.[^6] It would be incorrect to suggest
that there is a scientific consensus on exactly how severe these trends
may become, for there is a wide range of predictions outlining potential
climate scenarios. These predictions, which range from the climate
stabilizing between 2-6 degrees centigrade warmer than usual, are
largely dependent upon current efforts to stabilize greenhouse gas
emissions.[^7] Worst case scenarios, or the "business as usual" models,
predict dramatic increases in the severity and frequency of extreme
weather events, rising sea levels which will submerge many of the
world's major metropolises, and mass extinction events which will wipe
out many of the known species of plants and animals.

In response to these dire predictions, politicians around the world
convened in Paris at COP-21 to outline how our species ought to respond.
Extremist suggestions of abandoning growth entirely in favor of a zero
emissions world were abandoned outright as unrealistic and undesirable.
Likewise, it was clear to these leaders that any business as usual plan
would be irresponsible and undesirable. A healthy middle ground was
eventually agreed upon by virtually every major country, except the
United Staes, whereby actions would be initiated to try and limit the
mean global temperature increase to less than 2 degrees centigrade.[^8]
Even developing countries, notably China and India, were signatories to
the agreement despite the overwhelming culpability of industrialized
nations in historic emissions. The specific policy steps the world
agreed upon largely centered around transitioning away from fossil fuels
towards renewable energy sources such as wind, solar, and hydropower.

Despite the clear danger of refusing to acquiesce to the global
consensus on climate change, the United States refused to ratify the
agreement under President Obama and has pulled out entirely under
President Trump. This decision has global significance, as more than 14%
of global Carbon Dioxide emissions come from America.[^9] The land of
Big Macs, SUVs, and capitalist freedom has unfortunately reserved its
right to consume as its wont, regardless of the number of Pacific island
nations which will be under water in one hundred years.

Some states, notably California and Massachusetts, have transcended
their lackey federal government and have decided to adhere to the
COP-agreement. Rather than stymie their economies or result in worse
life outcomes for their citizens, these policies have generally had
tremendously positive effects. Massachusetts has committed to reducing
its emissions by 80% by 2050, and with the help of generous renewable
energy subsidies it is on track to accomplish its goal.[^10] California
has adopted similar measures, and recently went one step further by
mandating all new homes constructed after 2020 be equipped with solar
panels.[^11] Both states have also maintained their commitment to
sustainability by promoting recycling, banning plastic bags in various
municipalities, and implementing fuel efficiency standards which are
more stringent than Federally mandated standards. Many Republicans would
mistakenly argue that these initiatives are yet another example of a
heavy-handed government interfering in personal liberty and reducing
overall welfare by impeding on competitive market equilibriums.

Leaving aside the basic economic refutation that environmentally
conscious policies merely account for externalities which should be
priced appropriately, the "free market" argument against these
progressive state's policies still seems to fall flat. Investment in
solar and wind technologies has created thousands of jobs for both CA
and MA, and their economies are clearly not suffering. The state of
California is the sixth largest economy in the world, surpassing even
European titans such as France.[^12] If the world's next great
technological advances don't come from Silicon Valley, they may come
from Boston, which was recently named the "city best positioned to
succeed in the next-wave digital economy".[^13] Given their relatively
low unemployment rates, high GDP per capita, and culture of
technological innovation, it seems misguided to suggest that California
and Massachusetts's adherence to international climate change mitigation
goals has had a deleterious effect on their economies.

Even if one ignores the overwhelming majority of scientific predictions
concerning climate change, the case for drastic policy change is clear.
If we radically transition to more sustainable societies and it turns
out that Trump correctly predicted that climate change is merely a hoax
invented by the Chinese, would humanity regret its implementation of
these policies? An imagined world powered exclusively by renewable
energies and where production is occurs through the use of recycled
materials and sustainable extraction rates provides a fairly utopian
example of what our societies could look like.

First, nations would become energy independent, and would be reliant on
the sun shining, the wind blowing, or the tides changing to electrify
their cities. This would have significant geopolitical consequences, as
suddenly countries around the world would no longer be reliant upon
volatile fossil fuel trading partners such as Iran or the United States.
Simultaneously, domestic economies would be bolstered by the creation of
jobs needed to service this renewable energy sector. The renewable
energy economy would also have positive externality effects which would
improve the quality of life for citizens around the world. Air and water
pollution rates would fall, as fewer and fewer particulates and noxious
gases were released into the atmosphere. This in turn would result in
fewer human deaths from respiratory illness, cancer, and other various
ailments caused by our continual low-level consumption of toxins.
Non-human animals may also collectively rejoice, as their habitat would
be less at risk of imminent destruction. The extraction, transportation,
processing, and burning of fossil fuels is disastrous to local
ecologies. Rooftop solar power is thus a welcome alternative to clear
cutting a forest to extract oil which is then transported around the
globe in a tanker which has a low probability, but a probability
nonetheless, of catastrophically failing and releasing its load into the
sea. This maintenance of biodiversity through the reduction of harmful
fossil fuel processes would have tremendous benefits for our species,
which is fundamentally dependent on various ecosystems for survival.
Thus, a world of drastic policies to combat climate change is a more
sustainable world, where the consumption of current generations does not
pose an existential threat to the survival of future generations.
Regardless of the reality of our changing climate, this is a noble goal
worth pursuing.

Works Cited

Down To Earth Climate Change - Resources. Accessed May 22, 2018.
https://globalclimate.ucr.edu/resources.html.

\"Boston Named #1 Startup City for Second Year Running.\" Mass.gov.
Accessed May 22, 2018.
https://www.mass.gov/news/boston-named-1-startup-city-for-second-year-running.

\"California Becomes 1st State in Nation to Require Solar Panels for New
Homes.\" AccuWeather.com - Under Maintenance. Accessed May 22, 2018.
https://www.accuweather.com/en/weather-news/california-becomes-1st-state-in-nation-to-require-solar-panels-for-new-homes/70004961.

\"California Passes France As World\'s 6th-Largest Economy.\" Fortune.
Accessed May 22, 2018.
http://fortune.com/2016/06/17/california-france-6th-largest-economy/.

\"Clean Energy and Climate Plan for 2020.\" Mass.gov. Accessed May 22,
2018.
https://www.mass.gov/service-details/clean-energy-and-climate-plan-for-2020.

Clinton, Hillary. \"Did Trump Say Climate Change Was a Chinese Hoax?\"
\@politifact. June 02, 2016. Accessed May 22, 2018.
http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/jun/03/hillary-clinton/yes-donald-trump-did-call-climate-change-chinese-h/.

\"Graphic: The Relentless Rise of Carbon Dioxide -- Climate Change:
Vital Signs of the Planet.\" NASA. November 08, 2016. Accessed May 22,
2018.
https://climate.nasa.gov/climate_resources/24/graphic-the-relentless-rise-of-carbon-dioxide/.

Anonymous. \"Paris Agreement - Climate Action - European Commission.\"
Social Protection Statistics - Unemployment Benefits - Statistics
Explained. February 16, 2017. Accessed May 22, 2018.
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/paris_en.

\"Projections of Future Changes in Climate.\" AR4 SYR Synthesis Report
Summary for Policymakers - 2 Causes of Change. Accessed May 22, 2018.
https://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/spmsspm-projections-of.html.

Scanlon, Kate. \"Bernie Sanders: \'Climate Change Is the Greatest Threat
Facing the Planet\'.\" The Daily Signal. August 03, 2015. Accessed May
22, 2018.
https://www.dailysignal.com/2015/08/01/bernie-sanders-climate-change-is-the-greatest-threat-facing-the-planet/.

Tol, Richard S.j. \"Quantifying the Consensus on Anthropogenic Global
Warming in the Literature: Rejoinder.\" *Energy Policy* 73 (2014): 709.
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.06.003.

\"Unstats \| Millennium Indicators.\" United Nations. Accessed May 22,
2018. http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/SeriesDetail.aspx?srid=749.

[^1]: Scanlon, Kate. \"Bernie Sanders: \'Climate Change Is the Greatest
    Threat Facing the Planet\'.\" The Daily Signal. August 03, 2015.
    Accessed May 22, 2018.
    https://www.dailysignal.com/2015/08/01/bernie-sanders-climate-change-is-the-greatest-threat-facing-the-planet/.

[^2]: Clinton, Hillary. \"Did Trump Say Climate Change Was a Chinese
    Hoax?\" \@politifact. June 02, 2016. Accessed May 22, 2018.
    http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/jun/03/hillary-clinton/yes-donald-trump-did-call-climate-change-chinese-h/.

[^3]: \"Graphic: The Relentless Rise of Carbon Dioxide -- Climate
    Change: Vital Signs of the Planet.\" NASA. November 08, 2016.
    Accessed May 22, 2018.
    https://climate.nasa.gov/climate_resources/24/graphic-the-relentless-rise-of-carbon-dioxide/.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Down To Earth Climate Change - Resources. Accessed May 22, 2018.
    https://globalclimate.ucr.edu/resources.html.

[^6]: Tol, Richard S.j. \"Quantifying the Consensus on Anthropogenic
    Global Warming in the Literature: Rejoinder.\" *Energy Policy* 73
    (2014): 709. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2014.06.003.

[^7]: \"Projections of Future Changes in Climate.\" AR4 SYR Synthesis
    Report Summary for Policymakers - 2 Causes of Change. Accessed May
    22, 2018.
    https://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/spmsspm-projections-of.html.

[^8]: Anonymous. \"Paris Agreement - Climate Action - European
    Commission.\" Social Protection Statistics - Unemployment Benefits -
    Statistics Explained. February 16, 2017. Accessed May 22, 2018.
    https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/paris_en.

[^9]: \"Unstats \| Millennium Indicators.\" United Nations. Accessed May
    22, 2018. http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/SeriesDetail.aspx?srid=749.

[^10]: \"Clean Energy and Climate Plan for 2020.\" Mass.gov. Accessed
    May 22, 2018.
    https://www.mass.gov/service-details/clean-energy-and-climate-plan-for-2020.

[^11]: \"California Becomes 1st State in Nation to Require Solar Panels
    for New Homes.\" AccuWeather.com - Under Maintenance. Accessed May
    22, 2018.
    https://www.accuweather.com/en/weather-news/california-becomes-1st-state-in-nation-to-require-solar-panels-for-new-homes/70004961.

[^12]: \"California Passes France As World\'s 6th-Largest Economy.\"
    Fortune. Accessed May 22, 2018.
    http://fortune.com/2016/06/17/california-france-6th-largest-economy/.

[^13]: \"Boston Named #1 Startup City for Second Year Running.\"
    Mass.gov. Accessed May 22, 2018.
    https://www.mass.gov/news/boston-named-1-startup-city-for-second-year-running.
