+++
title = "Climate Risks and Cape Cod:"
subtitle = "How State, County, and Local Governments Respond to a Crisis"
tags = ['professionalresponsibility']
date = 2023-07-24

# For description meta tag
description = "How State, County, and Local Governments Respond to a Crisis"

# Comment next line and the default banner wil be used.
banner = '/img/typing.jpg'

+++

Climate Risks and Cape Cod:

How State, County, and Local Governments Respond to a Crisis

Climate change poses an existential threat to coastal communities around
the world. New England is home to one such community: Cape Cod, a
peninsula with 560 miles of coastline extending into the Atlantic from
mainland Massachusetts.[^1] Surrounded by water on all sides and with a
max elevation of only three hundred and six feet, the Cape is acutely
vulnerable to sea level rise and other climate risks. Fortunately, these
risks are not lost on the political subdivisions of the Cape which are
tasked with shepherding the region through this crisis. Massachusetts,
unlike many other states, has acknowledged the extent of the climate
crisis and enacted aggressive legislation to both mitigate these risks
and adapt to the changing climate.[^2] The Cape Cod Commission, the
county government of the Cape, has followed the state's lead and enacted
a comprehensive Regional Policy Plan to address Barnstable County's
climate risks.[^3] Municipal governments on the Cape, including the Town
of Brewster, have moved swiftly to take advantage of state-opportunities
to address climate risks and have adopted coastal adaptation
strategies.[^4] The action, or inaction, of the federal government looms
large over these state and local responses to the climate crisis. While
the Cape may be able to adequately respond to climate risks at the state
and local level, America's most vulnerable cities, such as Houston, will
inevitably require more federal support. Climate change poses
trans-border risks which are beyond the scope of any single state or
city and are therefore best addressed by the federal government. The
federal government, through the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), often provides the ultimate backstop for addressing climate
risks when disaster strikes. Rather than reactively respond to these
crises through FEMA, the national government should encourage proactive
measures, such as sensible city planning, transition to renewables,
fortification where practicable and retreat where necessary. More
serious federal interventions could assist vulnerable regions like the
Cape and cities like Houston in their efforts to mitigate climate risks.

Cape Cod's unique geography and geology has made it one of the most
popular summer tourist destinations in New England. This popularity has
led to extensive coastal development on a landmass that, from its
creation some 10,000 years ago, was destined to be overcome by the
sea.[^5] The Cape, unlike mainland Massachusetts, is a terminal moraine
comprised of sand.[^6] Over the past hundred years, the population on
Cape Cod has exploded to some 212,000 residents spread throughout the
region's fifteen towns. [^7] The population is overwhelming old (median
age of 53), white (92.7% of the population), and wealthy (average
household income of \$74,336) relative to the United States' median.[^8]
During the warm summer months, an influx of tourists injects over \$1.2
billion into the economy and the population nearly triples.[^9] The
region's economy is highly dependent on these visitors, many of whom
come to enjoy the Cape's world class beaches. With four and a half
million annual visitors to the Cape Cod National Seashore alone, which
constitutes a mere forty miles of the coast, the total annual visitors
to the Cape may easily exceed ten million.[^10]

Unfortunately, the Cape beloved by millions is under siege from a
variety of climate risks. Physical risks, or the "risks arising from the
physical effects of climate change", pose a profound threat to the
region's beaches and coastal ecosystems.[^11] Many of the effects of
climate change are already wreaking havoc on the Cape's sandy shores.
The Outer Cape, spanning from Eastham to the northernmost town of
Provincetown, is losing more than three feet of beach per year on
average.[^12] Climate scientists estimate that the rate of erosion on
the Cape has nearly doubled due to climate change.[^13] Already, more
than 20% of the Cape, an area which contains \$29 billion in property,
is within FEMA-designated special flood hazard areas.[^14] This area of
over seventy square miles would almost certainly be inundated with
seawater during even a mild hurricane.[^15] A serious loss of shoreline
property and beach access would deter many seasonal tourists and have
profound consequences for the region's economy.

Another pillar of the Cape's economy, fishing and aquaculture, is also
buckling under the weight of climate change. Shellfish, including highly
acclaimed Wellfleet Oysters, are increasingly at risk of contracting
dangerous bacterial infections as sea temperatures rise.[^16] Vibrio, a
potentially lethal bacteria, has already been found in several Cape and
Islands' oyster beds, resulting in their temporary closure.[^17]
Meanwhile, wild seafood yields are also decreasing as traditionally
abundant species, such as lobster and cod, migrate North toward cooler
waters.[^18] Increasing water temperatures combined with overfishing
have resulted in wild shellfish populations plummeting to 1% of their
historic levels along Cape Cod.[^19] In a cruel twist of fate, some
species that have thrived in these warming temperatures are further
contributing to the collapse of native ecological systems. For example,
the purple marsh crab has eviscerated indigenous eel grass populations
which are vital to the intertidal salt marshes.[^20] As the salt marsh
vegetation is steadily consumed by the crabs, countless fish species
lose crucial spawning ground, thereby decreasing their populations.[^21]
Thus, the twin pillars of the Cape's economy, tourism and aquaculture,
are already under strain from the region's rapidly changing climate.

Fortunately, the state of Massachusetts ("MA") has acknowledged the
grave risks facing Cape Cod and has already enacted climate-conscious
legislation. In an era of intense partisanship, the Democratically
controlled bicameral legislature has been remarkably successful in
finding common ground with Massachusetts' Republican Governor, Charlie
Baker. The State has a long history of taking climate risks seriously by
developing bipartisan compromises. As one of original 2009 signatories
to the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, a first in the nation
inter-state cap and trade agreement, MA has required regulated
electricity providers to "buy allowances for their greenhouse gas
emissions."[^22] Then, in March 2021, the State passed "An Act Creating
a Next Generation Roadmap for MA Climate Policy" (the "Roadmap Act"), a
comprehensive climate bill with ambitious emissions reduction
targets.[^23] This new law requires the state to achieve net zero
emissions by 2050 and will require MA's utilities to increase their
renewable portfolios by at least 3% annually.[^24] The Roadmap Act also
guarantees an additional 2,400 megawatts of offshore wind energy, enough
to power 1.2 million homes, be developed off the coast.[^25] Vineyard
Wind, the first of these wind farms, is anticipating final federal
approval before construction can begin in 2021 in Nantucket Sound, just
South of Cape Cod.[^26] The Cape and Islands' State Senator, Julian Cyr,
is particularly excited about the leadership the State has shown in
creating these "tangible and specific" energy goals.[^27] In addition to
these efforts to reduce emissions and align the state with international
climate targets, Massachusetts is also preparing to address the risks of
climate change that are already impacting communities like the Cape.

The State has developed several programs to assist municipalities in
adapting to climate change. First, the "MA Green Communities Designation
and Grant Program" provides funding to MA municipalities to "find clean
energy solutions that reduce long-term energy costs."[^28] Likewise, the
"Municipal Vulnerability Preparedness Program" offers grants to
"municipalities that wish to assess their vulnerability to and prepare
for climate change impacts."[^29] Even the landmark 2021 Roadmap Act
situates local governments as crucial partners in protecting
Massachusetts' communities from climate risks. The Roadmap Act creates
"Environmental Justice" communities which ensure that proposed
infrastructure and energy development is assessed with meaningful input
from residents in light of climate risks and historical pollution.[^30]
Additionally, the Roadmap Act allows municipalities to enact "stretch"
building codes which would require developers build within "net-zero"
frameworks.[^31] However, Senator Cyr worries that without appropriate
subsidies for affordable housing units, these stretch building codes
will "increase cost per (housing) unit" and make the Cape even more
unaffordable for year-round residents.[^32] As the region's housing
costs become increasingly unaffordable, year-round residents and young
families have been priced out of their home communities. Due to archaic
home rule regulations, Massachusetts' municipalities retain large
control over local zoning. Home rule, combined with persistent and
caustic NIMBYism, has stymied efforts to develop more affordable housing
on Cape Cod.[^33] Senator Cyr attempted to address this challenge by
including a proposal to extend state housing subsidies to residents
earning up to 120% of area median income in the Roadmap Act. These
subsidies would have helped year-round residents afford net-zero homes
developed under the new "stretch" building code, but they were
unfortunately left out of the Roadmap Act.[^34] Despite this
disappointment, Senator Cyr remains hopeful that the Commonwealth will
ultimately provide more support to Cape residents who are squeezed by
rising housing prices.[^35]

The impact of climate risks on the region's housing prices is also
concerning to the Cape Cod Commission (the "Commission"), Barnstable
County's government and regional planning agency.[^36] Created in 1990
by "The Cape Cod Commission Act", the Commission consists of an eighteen
person legislative body comprised of elected representatives from the
Cape's fifteen towns plus a "Minority Representative", a "Native
American Representative", and a "Governor Appointee."[^37] These members
work in tandem with a three-person executive branch of County
Commissioners to enact policies to be implemented by the Commission's
thirty seven person staff.[^38] The Commission serves as an intermediary
between MA and the Cape's 15 towns, and is uniquely tasked with
approving large-scale developments on the Cape.[^39] The scope of the
Commission's work is limited to "regional" issues, and it strives to
maintain positive working relationships with both municipal and state
leaders.[^40]

Jordan Velozo, a Regulatory Officer at the Commission, noted that the
region is uniquely "vulnerable to climate hazards".[^41] The Commission,
despite its limited jurisdiction, seeks to mitigate these hazards via
its "Cape Cod Regional Policy Plan", a comprehensive plan that outlines
the County's goals for the region. While the Commission generally defers
to the "state's lead", it also proactively develops tools to facilitate
climate-conscious urban planning.[^42] For example, the Commission has
developed a baseline regional greenhouse gas inventory and has committed
to following state emission reduction standards.[^43] Its staff of GIS
experts have also created a free online "coastal resilience planning
tool", which enables developers to assess climate risks and hazards
prior to proposing a project.[^44] Likewise, its online solar siting
tool encourages the development of solar energy by allowing homeowners
to evaluate the energy potential of prospective solar sites.[^45]
Climate risks may be on the forefront of many Cape Codders' minds, as
the Commission has experienced an "uptick in interest" in their online
tools.[^46] Ultimately, the Cape Cod Commission is constrained both by
the goals of the State and the power of the towns. While both "the
public and Commission members" would like to be more involved with
direct action to mitigate climate risks on the Cape, it is unclear
whether the Commission would have the legal authority to enact more
heavy-handed interventions.[^47] Absent this clear authority, the
Commission remains an able, but limited, partner in promoting State
goals and assisting municipalities.

The fifteen municipal governments on Cape Cod are acutely aware of the
climate challenges facing the region. Many municipal decisions are made
via a direct democracy, town-wide vote at town meetings. The docket for
these town meetings may include citizens' petitions, but is largely set
by the Selected Board, an elected body responsible for setting the
general policies of the town. The Select Board also oversees and hires
the town administrator, who acts as an agent of the Board in managing
the day-to-day affairs of the town.[^48] In Brewster, a town of nearly
10,000 on the Lower Cape, Town Administrator Peter Lombardi is tasked
with translating residents' climate change concerns into tangible
actions.[^49] Like the Cape Cod Commission, Brewster uses
Massachusetts's climate targets as a starting point for local action.
Brewster has been designated a "Green Community" and a "Municipal
Vulnerability Preparedness Community" by the State.[^50] These
designations have allowed Brewster to access state funding to reduce
municipal energy consumption, hire a part-time "energy manager", and
assess climate vulnerabilities.[^51] The Town is actively pursuing
additional state funding to improve coastal resiliency by completing
physical projects to mitigate flooding.[^52] Brewster is acting quickly
to comply with the Roadmap Act's emissions target, and is already
developing municipal solar projects and implementing stringent fuel
efficiency standards for town vehicles.[^53] While energy development
remains a great opportunity for the town, many climate challenges
remain.

Echoing Senator Cyr's concerns, Mr. Lombardi identified the effects of
sea level rise on the Town's "water infrastructure" as the single
greatest climate risk facing Brewster. "Large portions of (Brewster's)
mains run along the coastal bank", and portions of this infrastructure
have already been destroyed by rising seas.[^54] When segments of the
water mains are capped and abandoned, the resiliency of the entire
system is put at risk. If too many segments of piping are left to the
rising tide, the overall water pressure in the system could drop to such
low levels that residential water services could be impacted.
Insufficient water pressure could in turn prevent fire services from
being able to adequately respond to Town fires, leaving properties and
natural resources at risk.[^55] The rising seas have also imperiled
Brewster's ability to manage runoff. Most of the "storm water drainage
was designed for a twenty-five-year event", but Brewster is now
experiencing "one-hundred-year" precipitation events every few
years.[^56] Often, there simply isn't enough space underground to
service that level of water surge. Brewster hopes to receive more state
funding to help protect its water mains and service flood water, but the
technical feasibility of these projects remains uncertain.

Funding risk mitigation and climate adaptation through municipal bonds
is a critical concern of small towns such as Brewster. Cape Cod's
municipalities are a handful of the nearly 50,000 active issuers in the
\$3.9 trillion municipal bond market.[^57] State and local governments,
despite being responsible for funding most non-defense infrastructure in
the United States, are largely constrained in their means of raising
revenues.[^58] General obligation bonds, which are best suited to
long-term climate mitigation projects that don't raise revenue,
typically cannot be discharged in bankruptcy proceedings and are backed
by the "full faith and credit" of the issuer.[^59] Climate risks may
seriously impact municipalities' ability to service the debt required
for expensive mitigation projects.[^60] As climate changes alters
"established population flows" it may undermine the residential tax base
that many towns rely on for funding.[^61] This could trigger a vicious
cycle, whereby shrinking populations hollow out town tax-bases, which in
turn results in a credit-downgrade. This downgrade may then make it
prohibitively expensive for the most at-risk towns to raise the funds
necessary to develop expensive climate mitigation projects.

Surprisingly, this doomsday scenario has not materialized in Brewster.
While none of the ratings agencies have reached out directly to Mr.
Lombardi to assess the town's climate risks, they appear unconcerned
about the Town's ability to service its debt during the ongoing climate
crisis.[^62] Mr. Lombardi, who has previously served as town manager for
two other coastal New England towns, viewed the prospect of the vicious
funding cycle being triggered as unlikely.[^63] In Brewster, and other
towns on the Cape, the vast majority of revenue is derived from
residential property taxes. While some properties may be at risk of
falling into the sea, according to Mr. Lombardi this "still isn't going
to impact (the) overall ability to raise revenues."[^64] Unlike
communities with one major taxpayer, such as a large business, the
Cape's towns derive their funding from a diverse range of properties
with varying levels of climate risks. Indeed, even Provincetown, which
would have virtually all of its downtown submerged during a mild
hurricane, had its municipal bond rating *upgraded* to AA+ by Standard &
Poors in 2018.[^65] While Brewster and other Cape communities may retain
a robust residential tax base, Mr. Lombardi acknowledged that climate
risks could seriously undermine some municipalities' ability to raise
revenues via bonds.[^66]

Some 2,000 miles away from Cape Cod, Houston, Texas provides an example
of what may befall a community that is unable, or unwilling, to
proactively address climate risks. With 2.3 million people, the majority
of whom are young people of color, Houston is a stark contrast to the
rural, predominately white Cape.[^67] The majority of America's climate
risks are concentrated in its coastal cities, as urban centers such as
Houston, New York, and Miami have billions more dollars of at-risk real
estate relative to more rural regions such as Cape Cod.[^68] Houston
tragically realized many of these costs in 2017, when Hurricane Harvey
dumped a record one trillion gallons of water over four days.[^69] At
the peak of the storm, which caused over \$125 billion in damages, more
than one third of the city was underwater.[^70] 20^th^ century climate
data suggested that Harvey was a 50,000 year storm, but modern climate
science predicts that storms like Harvey will strike the Gulf Coast with
increasing frequency.[^71] After Harvey, the state of Texas and the
federal government intervened dramatically to assist residents whose
homes were destroyed and lives were upended by the storm. Texas, let
alone the city of Houston, was unable to address the fallout from Harvey
alone. In 2016, the year before Harvey, the entire state budget of Texas
was only \$127.3 billion, roughly equivalent to the estimated costs of
the hurricane.[^72] Following the storm, Harris County authorized a mere
\$2.5 billion of flood abatement.[^73] The bulk of disaster relief
funding necessarily flowed from the federal government. Congress
allocated over \$2 billion in housing assistance, and the United States
Army Corps of Engineers began work on four major channeling projects.
Additionally, there are plans to develop a coastal barrier, dubbed
Bolivar Gates, along Galveston Bay.[^74] The city is continuing to
rebuild, hopeful that these expensive projects will lead to a more
resilient coast.

Houston's experience with Harvey highlights the need for federal
leadership to combat the climate crisis. When municipalities experience
"50,000 year" storms such as Harvey every few decades, city and state
budgets are hopelessly inadequate to address such exorbitant damages.
Fortunately, the Biden administration appears to be taking these climate
risks seriously. In one of his first actions as president, Joe Biden
reentered the United States into the Paris Climate Agreement.[^75]
President Biden is clearly more sympathetic than the previous
administration to ambitious climate proposals, including the "Green New
Deal" put forward by Massachusetts' Senator Ed Markey.[^76] In March
2021, President Biden unveiled a landmark infrastructure plan which
incorporates elements of Markey's "Green New Deal", including the
creation of a "Civilian Climate Corps".[^77] The infrastructure plan, if
passed, would provide states and municipalities with the type of support
State Senator Julian Cyr most hoped for from the federal government:
"money".[^78] Some scholars have suggested the federal government can
and should do more to combat the climate crisis through the creation of
a National Infrastructure Bank or National Investment Authority.[^79]
Alternatively, the Federal Reserve could do more via monetary policy and
the prioritization of green bond-buying to encourage climate-conscious
research and development. Irrespective of the mechanism, it's clear that
the federal government, often through FEMA, is ultimately accountable
for the nation's climate risks as the eventual backstop in disaster
relief.[^80]

Nevertheless, America's cities and states cannot sit idly by waiting for
climate disaster to strike. Climate mitigation and adaptation is crucial
if the worst-case disaster scenarios are to be avoided. Fortunately,
Cape Cod may yet avoid the fate of Houston by proactively preparing for
climate risks such as historic sea surges and record-breaking
precipitation. Beach fortification remains a short-term solution to
protecting the Cape's coastline. Yet spending millions on beach
nourishment is at best a temporary solution. The Outer Banks of North
Carolina offer a cautionary tale on the limits of fortification. Despite
spending tens of millions on beach fortification and raising property
taxes more than 50% to do so, the small town of Avon in the Outer Banks
still is frequently evacuated during storms.[^81] Avon, and the Cape's
most vulnerable coastal areas, may eventually be abandoned to the
oncoming tides. Unfortunately, the moral hazard of the Federal Flood
Insurance Program (FFIP) provides a strong incentive for coastal
property owners to continue living in dangerous areas.[^82] One creative
proposal from California attempts to mitigate the perverse incentives of
the FFIP by having the state pre-emptively purchase coastal homes and
then rent them out.[^83] The hope is that the state may recoup the
purchase costs while the home is still standing. Then, when the property
is inevitably consumed by the sea, the state is in a better position to
absorb the loss than a private homeowner. While this interesting
proposal has not yet been approved in California, if successful it may
inspire similar legislation in Massachusetts or other coastal states.

For now, Cape Cod will continue to grapple with myriad climate risks
through a variety of responses at the state, regional, and local levels.
Unlike some regions of the United States, each level of government with
jurisdiction over the Cape is contemplating the risks of climate change.
Hopefully, these efforts will continue to allow the Cape's communities
to adapt to the changing climate and mitigate the most serious climate
risks. If Mr. Lombardi is proven wrong and the municipal bond market on
the Cape enters a vicious cycle whereby the towns are unable to finance
necessary mitigation projects, then the region will require even more
state support. Regardless, the federal government will eventually need
to address the collective action problem of climate change adaptation.
The old adage that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure rings
particularly true when applied to the ongoing climate crisis. There is
still time for coastal cities to prepare for, or retreat from, the most
expensive crises. Yet the opportunity for action grows smaller by the
day. The climate crisis poses an existential threat to communities
millions call home, and, as Senator Cyr, Officer Velozo, and Mr.
Lombardi realize, it requires a proportional and timely response.

[^1]: Cape Cod Beaches \| Cape Cod, MA Coast, ,
    https://www.capecodchamber.org/things-to-do/beaches/ (last visited
    Apr 19, 2021).

[^2]: What You Need To Know About The New Mass. Climate Law, ,
    https://www.wbur.org/earthwhile/2021/03/26/new-mass-climate-law-faq
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^3]: Climate Action Plan \| Cape Cod Commission, ,
    https://www.capecodcommission.org/our-work/climate-action-plan/
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^4]: BCAGStrategyFinalDraft-Brewster Mass_0.pdf, ,
    https://content.sierraclub.org/grassrootsnetwork/sites/content.sierraclub.org.activistnetwork/files/teams/documents/BCAGStrategyFinalDraft-Brewster%20Mass_0.pdf
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^5]: World of Change: Coastline Change, (2014),
    https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/world-of-change/CapeCod (last
    visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^6]: *Id.*

[^7]: U.S. Census Bureau QuickFacts: Barnstable County, Massachusetts, ,
    https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/barnstablecountymassachusetts/PST045219
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^8]: *Id.*

[^9]: Cape Cod's Seasonal Economy on Crash Course With COVID-19 -- NBC
    Boston, ,
    https://www.nbcboston.com/news/coronavirus/cape-cods-seasonal-economy-on-crash-course-with-covid-19/2120688/
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^10]: Cape Cod National Seashore by the Numbers, , [New England
    Living]{.smallcaps} (2017),
    https://newenglandliving.tv/cape-cod-national-seashore-by-the-numbers/
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^11]: Woetzel, Jonathan, et al. "Climate Risk and Response: Physical
    Hazards and Socioeconomic Impacts", McKinsey Global Institute,
    January 2020

[^12]: The Boston Globe & Nestor Ramos, *Climate change on Cape Cod: At
    the edge of a warming world*, [BostonGlobe.com]{.smallcaps} ,
    https://apps.bostonglobe.com/metro/2019/09/26/cape-cod-climate-change/story
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^13]: *Id.*

[^14]: I*d.*

[^15]: Multi-Hazard Mitigation Planning \| Cape Cod Commission, ,
    https://www.capecodcommission.org/our-work/multi-hazard-mitigation-planning/
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^16]: Oysters and Vibriosis, , [FoodSafety.gov]{.smallcaps} (2017),
    https://www.foodsafety.gov/blog/vibriosis-101-oyster-food-safety
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^17]: Mary C. Serreze \| Special to The Republican, *Cape Cod oyster
    "Vibrio" poisoning case to be heard in Hampshire Superior Court*,
    [masslive]{.smallcaps} (2014),
    https://www.masslive.com/news/2014/12/toxic_cape_cod_oyster_case_to.html
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021); The Vineyard Gazette - Martha's
    Vineyard News \| State Confirms Cases of Vibrio from Farmed Oysters,
    ,
    https://vineyardgazette.com/news/2014/08/12/state-confirms-cases-vibrio-farmed-oysters
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^18]: Globe and Ramos, *supra* note 12.

[^19]: *Id.*

[^20]: *Id.*

[^21]: *Id.*

[^22]: Joroff, Alddine, Harvard Law School's Emmet and Environmental Law
    and Policy Clinic, Legal and Jurisdictional Analysis-Select Climate
    Change Related Laws.pdf, .

[^23]: What You Need To Know About The New Mass. Climate Law, *supra*
    note 2.

[^24]: Massachusetts governor to sign sweeping climate change bill, ,
    [NEWS10 ABC]{.smallcaps} (2021),
    https://www.news10.com/news/mass-news/massachusetts-governor-to-sign-sweeping-climate-change-bill/
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^25]: *Id.*

[^26]: Vineyard Wind 1, , [Vineyard Wind]{.smallcaps} ,
    https://www.vineyardwind.com/vineyard-wind-1 (last visited Apr 19,
    2021).

[^27]: Julian Cyr, *Interview with Cape Cod's State Senator* (2021).

[^28]: Green Communities Grants \| Mass.gov, ,
    https://www.mass.gov/service-details/green-communities-grants (last
    visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^29]: MA Climate Change Clearinghouse, , https://resilientma.org/mvp/
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^30]: What You Need To Know About The New Mass. Climate Law, *supra*
    note 2.

[^31]: *Id.*

[^32]: Cyr, *supra* note 27.

[^33]: *Id.*

[^34]: *Id.*

[^35]: *Id.*

[^36]: About Us \| Cape Cod Commission, ,
    https://www.capecodcommission.org/about-us/ccc-overview/ (last
    visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^37]: *Id.*

[^38]: *Id.*

[^39]: *Id.*

[^40]: Jordan Velozo, *Interview with Cape Cod Commission Regulatory
    Officer* (2021).

[^41]: *Id.*

[^42]: *Id.*

[^43]: 2018 Cape Cod Regional Policy Plan, 120.

[^44]: *Id.* at 105

[^45]: Solar Screening Tool \| Cape Cod Commission, ,
    https://www.capecodcommission.org/our-work/solar-screening-tool/
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^46]: Velozo, *supra* note 40.

[^47]: *Id.*

[^48]: Select Board, ,
    https://brewster-ma.gov/departments-mainmenu-26/board-of-selectmen-mainmenu-105
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^49]: U.S. Census Bureau QuickFacts: Brewster town, Barnstable County,
    Massachusetts; United States, ,
    https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/brewstertownbarnstablecountymassachusetts,US/PST045219
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^50]: Peter Lombardi, *Brewster's Climate Change Adaptation and
    Mitigation* (2021).

[^51]: Peter Lombardi, *Interview with Brewster Town Administrator*
    (2021).

[^52]: *Id.*

[^53]: *Id.*

[^54]: *Id.*

[^55]: *Id.*

[^56]: *Id.*

[^57]: Christine Chung, *Rising Tides and Rearranging Deckchairs: How
    Climate Change Is Reshaping Infrastructure Finance and Threatening
    to Sink Municipal Budgets* (2021).

[^58]: [Christine Sgarlata Chung]{.smallcaps}, *Rising Tides and
    Rearranging Deckchairs: How Climate Change is Reshaping
    Infrastructure Finance and Threatening to Sink Municipal Budgets*
    (2019), 168, https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3452590 (last visited
    Apr 19, 2021).

[^59]: *Id.* at 183

[^60]: *Id.*

[^61]: *Id.*

[^62]: Lombardi, *supra* note 51.

[^63]: *Id.*

[^64]: *Id.*

[^65]: "Notice of Material Event for Continuing Disclosure Requirements
    of SEC Rule 15c2-12", April 13, 2018, Ptown Bond Rating Upgrade.pdf,
    .

[^66]: Lombardi, *supra* note 51.

[^67]: U.S. Census Bureau QuickFacts: Houston city, Texas, ,
    https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/houstoncitytexas (last visited Apr
    19, 2021).

[^68]: Samanda Dorger, *These U.S. Cities Are the Most at Risk From
    Rising Seas*, [TheStreet]{.smallcaps} ,
    https://www.thestreet.com/personal-finance/real-estate/us-cities-most-in-danger-of-rising-seas-14839105
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^69]: Full Bio Follow Linkedin Kimberly Amadeo is an expert on U.S et
    al., *Hurricane Harvey Shows How Climate Change Can Impact the
    Economy*, [The Balance]{.smallcaps} ,
    https://www.thebalance.com/hurricane-harvey-facts-damage-costs-4150087
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^70]: *Id.*

[^71]: Jim Blackburn, 2, *Houston Flooding 3.5 Years After Harvey*
    (2021),
    https://www.bakerinstitute.org/research/houston-flooding-35-years-after-harvey/
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^72]: Texas state budget and finances, , [Ballotpedia]{.smallcaps} ,
    https://ballotpedia.org/Texas_state_budget_and_finances (last
    visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^73]: Jim Blackburn & Philip B Bedient, 3, *Houston a Year after
    Harvey: Where We Are and Where We Need to Be* 55.

[^74]: *Id.*

[^75]: Republic World, *"We're back in the Paris Climate Agreement":
    Biden announces just hours into presidency*, [Republic
    World]{.smallcaps} ,
    https://www.republicworld.com/world-news/us-news/were-back-in-the-paris-climate-agreement-biden-announces-just-hours-into-presidency.html
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^76]: Kelsey Tamborrino, *Ed Markey on the Green New Deal, Biden*,
    [POLITICO]{.smallcaps} , https://politi.co/3tyrrnL (last visited Apr
    19, 2021).

[^77]: 'Green New Deal' leaders see Biden climate plans as a victory,
    kind of, , [opb]{.smallcaps} ,
    https://www.opb.org/article/2021/04/04/green-new-deal-leaders-see-biden-climate-plans-as-a-victory-kind-of/
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^78]: Cyr, *supra* note 27.

[^79]: Saule T Omarova, *The Climate Case for a National Investment
    Authority* 15; [Chung]{.smallcaps}, *supra* note 58.

[^80]: Chung, *supra* note 57.

[^81]: Tiny Town, Big Decision: What Are We Willing to Pay to Fight the
    Rising Sea? - The New York Times, ,
    https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/14/climate/outer-banks-tax-climate-change.html
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).

[^82]: Moral Hazard: How the National Flood Insurance Program Is
    Limiting Risk Reduction, , [HOMELAND SECURITY AFFAIRS]{.smallcaps}
    (2016), https://www.hsaj.org/articles/13755 (last visited Apr 19,
    2021).

[^83]: California Has A New Idea For Homes At Risk From Rising Seas:
    Buy, Rent, Retreat, , [NPR.org]{.smallcaps} ,
    https://www.npr.org/2021/03/21/978416929/california-has-a-new-idea-for-homes-at-risk-from-rising-seas-buy-rent-retreat
    (last visited Apr 19, 2021).
