Employee Ownership Structures 101: ESOPS**\
**

![](./media/image1.jpg){width="4.444444444444445in"
height="2.9583333333333335in"}

Employee ownership refers to a specific type of business structure
centered around worker ownership of either part or all of their
employing entity. Usually, employee ownership is structured as either a
worker cooperative, a worker collective, a typical employee stock
ownership plan, or a democratic employee stock ownership plan. These
four employee ownership models differ in the degree of control employee
owners are granted over management, corporate governance, and control of
profits.  

A. Typical Employee Stock Ownership Plans

An employee stock ownership plan, commonly referred to as an ESOP, is a
financial tool used to transfer partial or full ownership of a company
to employees.[^1] Companies which utilize an ESOP are structured as
either a C or S corporation, with stock being held by the ESOP trust. C
corporation profits are taxed at the corporate tax level, and again at
the personal income tax level when dividends are dispersed to
shareholders. Alternatively, S corporations divide income and losses
amongst shareholders, as shareholders only incur a tax burden at the
individual level.[^2]

Often, ESOPs are governed in a similar fashion to traditional
corporations, with a few executives serving as trustees which tasked
with electing the board of directors. In turn, the board of directors is
responsible for hiring management, which then oversees the employee
owners. With an ESOP, worker owners receive voting rights on certain
companywide decisions, such as the sale of assets. These rights are
typically conferred on a one-share-one-vote basis, and are limited in
scope. They are also granted the authority to select their trustee
representative, who administers the ESOP trust on their behalf. This
crucial link allows employee owners in an ESOP to exert some control
over the direction and governance of their corporation, while ceding
certain responsibilities and rights to the board of directors and
management team. However, traditional ESOPs are not necessarily guided
by the democratic principles which are characteristic of worker
cooperatives or collectives.

ESOPs are by far the most common employee ownership structure in the
United States. It is important to note that many large publicly traded
companies utilize ESOPs to confer some small ownership stake to their
employees. For example, America[']{dir="rtl"}s largest employer,
Walmart, has 1.1 million active ESOP participants.[^3] These publicly
traded entities typically don[']{dir="rtl"}t offer meaningful quantities
of shares to their employees, as ownership is often concentrated among a
small number of shareholders. To again use the case of Walmart, 50.86%
of the business, or some \$163.2 billion, is owned by the founding
Walton family.[^4]

In order to gain a clearer picture of the use of ESOPs to offer
significant benefits to employee owners, it is helpful to restrict the
definition to include only companies where employee owners control at
least 30% of the company. Under this restriction, as of 2015, there were
roughly 7,000 ESOPs in the United States which collectively employ some
10.8 million people and control assets of nearly \$1.3 trillion.[^5]
Some typical ESOPs will explicitly restrict differentials in company
ownership and salary, so as to ensure a more equitable distribution of
wealth for all employee owners.  Publix, a supermarket chain based in
Florida, is the largest employee-owned company in the United States with
nearly 200,000 employees.[^6] While Publix doesn[']{dir="rtl"}t
explicitly restrict pay differentials, its CEO Todd Jones receives total
compensation that is 74% less than the total compensation paid to his
peer grocery chain executives.[^7]![Screen Shot 2018-11-29 at 10.32.13
AM.png](./media/image2.png){width="7.652840113735783in"
height="2.856492782152231in"}

Figure 3: Typical Employee Stock Ownership Plan Model[^8]

B. Democratic Employee Stock Ownership Plans

A democratic ESOP overlays certain democratic principles of governance
onto the traditional ESOP ownership structure.[^9] Democratic, or
cooperative ESOPs, utilize the ["]{dir="rtl"}instructed-trustee" model,
whereby the trustee representative only acts on the basis of majority
consensus of the worker-owners. These employee shareholders are granted
voting rights on a one-person-one-vote basis which empowers them to
direct the activities of the trustee, and by extension, the corporation.
Apart from this democratic control of the corporation, democratic ESOPs
do not differ from typical ESOPs.

![Screen Shot 2018-11-29 at 10.32.23
AM.png](./media/image3.png){width="6.833333333333333in"
height="2.723908573928259in"}

Figure 4: Democratic Employee Stock Ownership Plan Model[^10]

[^1]: Wiefek, Nancy. How an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) Works.
    Accessed November 27, 2018.
    [[https://www.nceo.org/articles/esops-by-the-numbers]{.underline}](https://www.nceo.org/articles/esops-by-the-numbers).

[^2]: \"What Is the Difference Between S Corp and C Corp?\"
    [[Legalzoom.com]{.underline}](http://legalzoom.com/). August 14,
    2017. Accessed November 27, 2018.
    [[https://www.legalzoom.com/articles/what-is-the-difference-between-s-corp-and-c-corp]{.underline}](https://www.legalzoom.com/articles/what-is-the-difference-between-s-corp-and-c-corp).

[^3]: Dudley, Thomas "How Big is America's Employee-Owned Economy? -
    Fifty by Fifty: Employee Ownership News - Medium."
    [[medium.com]{.underline}](http://medium.com), Medium, 22 June 2017,
    [[https://medium.com/fifty-by-fifty/how-big-is-americas-employee-owned-economy-59fb120a77cf]{.underline}](https://medium.com/fifty-by-fifty/how-big-is-americas-employee-owned-economy-59fb120a77cf)

[^4]: \"CORRECTED-OFFICIAL-Wal-Mart Says Walton Family to Sell Shares
    To\...\" Reuters. April 10, 2015. Accessed November 27, 2018.
    [[https://www.reuters.com/article/wal-mart-stores-buyback/corrected-official-wal-mart-says-walton-family-to-sell-shares-to-keep-lid-on-stake-idUSL2N0X724X20150410]{.underline}](https://www.reuters.com/article/wal-mart-stores-buyback/corrected-official-wal-mart-says-walton-family-to-sell-shares-to-keep-lid-on-stake-idUSL2N0X724X20150410).

[^5]: Wiefek, Nancy. How an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) Works.
    Accessed November 27, 2018.
    [[https://www.nceo.org/articles/esops-by-the-numbers]{.underline}](https://www.nceo.org/articles/esops-by-the-numbers).

[^6]: How an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) Works. July 2018.
    Accessed November 27, 2018.
    [[https://www.nceo.org/articles/employee-ownership-100]{.underline}](https://www.nceo.org/articles/employee-ownership-100).

[^7]: Manning, Margie.
    [[Bizjournals.com]{.underline}](http://bizjournals.com/). March 8,
    2018. Accessed November 27, 2018.
    [[https://www.bizjournals.com/tampabay/news/2018/03/08/publix-ceo-turns-down-a-raise-but-still-bags-a-28.html]{.underline}](https://www.bizjournals.com/tampabay/news/2018/03/08/publix-ceo-turns-down-a-raise-but-still-bags-a-28.html).

[^8]: Kerr, Camille. A Brief, Visual Guide to Understanding Employee
    Ownership Structures. Oakland, CA: Democracy at Work Institute,
    2017.

[^9]: Kerr, Camille. A Brief, Visual Guide to Understanding Employee
    Ownership Structures. Oakland, CA: Democracy at Work Institute,
    2017.

[^10]: Ibid.
