+++
title = "Facebook, Ethics, and Ignorance"
subtitle = "One attorney’s discovery that not everything online is public"
tags = ['ethics']
date = 2020-06-25

# For description meta tag
description = "One Attorney’s Discovery That Not Everything Online is Public."

# Comment next line and the default banner wil be used.
banner = '/img/typing.jpg'

+++

1.  **The Case**

 
![](/img/fb.jpeg) [^1] 

On September 21, 2021, the New Jersey Supreme Court finally dismissed an
Ethics complaint originally brought against John Robertelli in 2008 for
his use of a rapidly growing social media platform to gain information
about Dennis Hernandez, a party opponent.[^2]

In the original case Hernandez alleged that he was hit and disabled by
an Oakland, New Jersey police department cruiser.[^3] As the defense
attorney for the city, Robertelli directed his paralegal, Valentina
Cordoba, to gain information about Hernandez based on "online
searches".[^4] She soon discovered his Facebook profile, which to her
dismay was then switched from public to private. At a crossroads, the
paralegal asked Robertelli for permission to "friend" Hernandez to
access his private Facebook account. The attorney quickly agreed, so the
paralegal sent a friend request to Hernandez claiming that he looked
like her favorite hockey player. Unaware that this new admirer was an
employee of the counsel opposing his civil-injury lawsuit, Hernandez
accepted the request. The paralegal then proceeded to download private
videos from his Facebook page which showed him wrestling with his
brother allegedly after he sustained his debilitating injuries from the
police cruiser.[^5]

Ultimately, Hernandez settled with the city for \$400,000 in 2010. But,
given the deception of the paralegal, he also lodged an ethics complaint
with the New Jersey Office of Attorney Ethics which commenced the action
against Robertelli.[^6]

1.  **The Violation**

![](/img/violation.jpeg) [^7] 


Robertelli's behavior clearly violates several of the American Bar
Association's Model Rules of Professional Conduct. First, Rule 4.2
specifies that:

"In representing a client, a lawyer shall not communicate about the
subject of the representation with a person the lawyer knows to be
represented by another lawyer in the matter, unless the lawyer has the
consent of the other lawyer or is authorized to do so by law or a court
order."[^8]

Cordoba communicated with Hernandez, the opponent of her client, for the
sole purpose of gaining information that would be prejudicial to
Hernandez in the ongoing matter. Of course, Rule 4.2 concedes that such
communications could have been permissible given the consent of
Hernandez or his attorney. Did Robertelli or Cordoba attempt to gain
this permission? No! Instead, they violated ABA Rule 8.4(c), which
states that an attorney shall not "engage in conduct involving
dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation".[^9] Cordoba
fraudulently posed as an admirer of Hernandez to gain access to his
Facebook profile and misrepresented by omission her connection to
Robertelli. Given this clear violation, why did the New Jersey Supreme
Court ultimately dismiss the Ethics complaint against Robertelli?

3.  **Ignorance of the Rules as an Excuse?**

![](/img/excuse.jpeg) [^10] 


Robertelli's main defense against this charge was that he had "little
knowledge" of Facebook.[^11] Typically, defendants are not able to claim
that their alleged behavior doesn't warrant punishment because they
weren't aware of its prohibition. Some crimes, deemed *malum in se*, or
wrong in essence, are so self-evidently bad that the ignorance of their
prohibition is inconceivable.[^12] For example, it strains the
imagination that a defendant could claim immunity for murder because
they were unaware murder was a crime. Nevertheless, this defense gains
some plausibility for *malum prohibitum* acts, or those which are wrong
by prohibition.[^13] A driver who parked their car illegally on a city
street might plausibly have believed that there was nothing wrong or
illegal with their parking space. Many may wonder how we could hold
someone accountable for a good-faith act that's not obviously wrong or
harmful.

Nearly 200 years ago, The Supreme Court settled this dispute in Barlow
v. United States when it declared "ignorance of the law will not excuse
any person, either civilly or criminally".[^14] This common maxim, that
ignorance of the law is no excuse, henceforth formed the foundation for
much of American jurisprudence.

Even if we accept that Robertelli's coordinated sleuthing with his
paralegal is *malum prohibitum*, which is a dubious proposition given
the misrepresentation involved, then how could his defense overcome the
centuries-old standard set by the Supreme Court?

4.  **You're kitten me**

![](/img/kitten.jpeg) [^15] 

Facebook celebrated its four-year anniversary and 100 millionth user in
2008, the year Robertelli claimed he was not familiar with the
platform.[^16] While he apparently hadn't heard of it, millions of
people around the world, including his legal opponent Hernandez and his
own paralegal, were active users. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court of New
Jersey found it plausible that Robertelli had no conception that
information posted online may be private AND that this ignorance was a
sufficient defense against his clear rule violations.[^17]

Perhaps the court was lenient in imputing the actions of his employee,
Cordoba, to him. Or, more likely, the court was protecting a fellow
lawyer in a tacit acknowledgement that lawyers are not the most
technologically savvy population. Even the nation's top lawmakers
apparently struggle to understand basic concepts underpinning Facebook.
At a 2018 Congressional hearing, Senators asked Mark Zuckerberg clueless
questions such as how the platform can be free and make money and
whether advertisers know when one "emails" via WhatsApp.[^18] The 2020
Coronavirus pandemic further exposed the legal profession's outdated
ways. From background malfunctions to cat-attorneys in Zoom hearings,
lawyers across the country struggled to adapt to the new norms of remote
work.[^19]

While these guffaws garnered millions of bemused views, they confirmed
the stereotype that lawyers simply can't keep up with the times. Despite
this perception, the ABA rules are far less lenient than the New Jersey
Supreme Court regarding the legal profession's apparent inability to
stay abreast of the latest technological trends. Comment 8 to Rule 1.1
notes that "to maintain the requisite knowledge and skill, a lawyer
should keep abreast of changes in the law and its practice, including
the benefits and risks associated with *relevant technology*."[^20]
Whether the nation's fastest growing social media network, a platform
with more than 100 million users, was relevant to Robertelli's legal
practice in 2008 is an open question. Fortunately, at least the New
Jersey Supreme Court was able to agree that in 2021 "social media is
ubiquitous, a common form of communication among members of the
public."[^21] Apparently, ignorance of the law is, again, no longer an
excuse, for Justice Barry Albin concluded that "at this point, attorneys
cannot take refuge in the defense of ignorance".[^22]

[^1]: https://external-content.duckduckgo.com/iu/?u=https%3A%2F%2Ftse1.mm.bing.net%2Fth%3Fid%3DOIP.zM8CCnueU0c914yVXp2boAHaD5%26pid%3DApi&f=1

[^2]: https://www.law.com/njlawjournal/2021/09/21/lawyer-beats-ethics-case-after-paralegal-allegedly-used-facebook-to-friend-adversarys-client-heres-how-he-did-it/

[^3]: Id.

[^4]: https://www.northjersey.com/story/news/bergen/2021/09/22/bergen-county-nj-ethics-violations-dismissed-against-attorney/5803610001/

[^5]: Id.

[^6]: Id.

[^7]: https://external-content.duckduckgo.com/iu/?u=http%3A%2F%2Fecx.images-amazon.com%2Fimages%2FI%2F413HMTS0G9L.\_SY344_BO1%2C204%2C203%2C200\_.jpg&f=1&nofb=1

[^8]: https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_4_2_communication_with_person_represented_by_counsel/

[^9]: https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_4_2_communication_with_person_represented_by_counsel/

[^10]: https://external-content.duckduckgo.com/iu/?u=http%3A%2F%2Fs2.quickmeme.com%2Fimg%2Fca%2Fca2f643913c268c3183794734783fb11a88f02d53b7e7b64aaa42ddbb2865c4f.jpg&f=1&nofb=1

[^11]: https://www.law.com/njlawjournal/2021/09/21/lawyer-beats-ethics-case-after-paralegal-allegedly-used-facebook-to-friend-adversarys-client-heres-how-he-did-it/

[^12]: https://www.heritage.org/crime-and-justice/report/ignorance-the-law-no-excuse-it-reality

[^13]: Id.

[^14]: US V. Barlow, 132 US 271 (1889)
    https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/132/271/

[^15]: https://laughingsquid.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Cat-Lawyer-Zoom-.jpg

[^16]: https://www.businessofapps.com/data/facebook-statistics/

[^17]: https://www.northjersey.com/story/news/bergen/2021/09/22/bergen-county-nj-ethics-violations-dismissed-against-attorney/5803610001/

[^18]: https://www.newstatesman.com/science-tech/2018/04/five-clueless-questions-united-states-senators-asked-mark-zuckerberg

[^19]: https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/i-m-not-cat-video-shows-lawyer-can-t-turn-n1257168

[^20]: https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_1_1_competence/comment_on_rule_1_1/

[^21]: https://www.law.com/njlawjournal/2021/09/21/lawyer-beats-ethics-case-after-paralegal-allegedly-used-facebook-to-friend-adversarys-client-heres-how-he-did-it/

[^22]: Id.
