+++
title = "Inequality and Inefficiency"
subtitle = "Does the welfare state enhance or undermine economic efficiency? Are societies with greater or lesser amounts of inequality more productive?"
tags = ['economics']
date = 2017-03-17

# For description meta tag
description = "does the welfare state enhance or undermine economic efficiency? Are societies with greater or lesser amounts of inequality more productive?"

# Comment next line and the default banner wil be used.
banner = '/img/blog.jpg'

+++

The precise relationship between the welfare state and economic
efficiency is challenging to ascertain, as ideological bias may suggest
explanations that are politically expedient but have little resemblance
to reality. This challenge remains for even the most neutral observer,
who may be befuddled by incomplete data sets, exogenous economic shocks,
or confounding variables which collectively muddy the waters.
Nevertheless, as economic theory has improved and decades of economic
data has accumulated, it has become increasingly clear that properly
designed welfare policies may enhance economic efficiency, and that
inequality is negatively related to productivity. These conclusions are
supported by theoretical models which show instances of market failure
prone to welfare state correction, and empirical data supporting the
theory. The suggestion that the existence of a comprehensive welfare
state may improve efficiency directly contradicts classical economic
theory, which suggests that welfare states, to the extent they interfere
with unfettered market processes, will undermine economic efficiency.
Similarly, this reasoning has been extended by Okun (1975) to suggest
that inequality and efficiency are inexorably intertwined within
capitalism, and thus societies which opt to lessen inequality are likely
becoming less productive in the process. In order to show that the
welfare state and reduced inequality may enhance economic efficiency, it
is first necessary to understand the basic structure and significance of
the classical argument and why it is incomplete.

Economic efficiency is traditionally understood as maximizing output per
unit of input. While this definition may aptly explain the production of
a widget factory, it is rather incomplete when considering the
efficiency of something as complex as a national economy. Classical
economics offers a more comprehensive definition, positing that
efficient markets are characterized by perfect information, a large
number of perfectly competitive firms, high mobility of labor and
capital, and minimal government interference. Classicists would maintain
government insofar as it guarantees the property rights and contract
laws underpinning the market, but would suggest that any further
interference will diminish economic efficiency. The welfare state, if
defined as a government with high taxation and spending, is thus
anti-ethical to the proper function of the classicist's idealized
market. Pontusson (2005) summarizes the many ways in which the welfare
state allegedly undermines efficiency and productivity by noting high
taxes and generous benefits represent a disincentive to work while
creating dead weight loss. Furthermore, public monopolies are said to be
fundamentally inefficient due to a lack of competition.

Despite the predictions classical economics had for the disastrous
effects of the welfare state on the economy, many democratic countries
opted to expand their welfare policies during the twentieth century.
Okun (1975) suggests that this trend is emblematic of "The Big Tradeoff"
between equality and efficiency, with democracies occasionally opting
for greater equality at the expense of efficiency. Indeed, the very
existence of democratic rights suggests that societies values some
things which "are not denominated in dollars" (Okun, 13). While Okun
notes that there are certain policies which may both improve efficiency
and reduce inequality, the two are typically at odds, which would
suggest a capitalist democracy with a comprehensive welfare state has
generous benefits at the expense of productivity and efficiency.

Even Okun's general suggestion that inequality alleviating progressive
tax and transfer welfare policies will reduce productivity or growth
proves to be questionable. Korpi (1985) provides a useful framework for
understanding why "the big tradeoff" may be exaggerated by noting that
"work incentives and economic efficiency...(will) decrease when
inequality becomes large" (Korpi, 101). This fairly intuitive framework
suggests that in an exorbitantly unequal world, the prospects of the
many economic losers becoming one of the few economic winners is so
dismal that there will be little motivation for investment in personal
human capital. Furthermore, even in more egalitarian societies the
tradeoff between equality and productivity doesn't always hold, for not
all inequality is the result of market processes (Pontusson, 211).
Cingano's (2014) empirical results confirm this framework, and show that
inequality has a sizable and negative impact on economic growth (Cingano
16,). By using the Gini coefficient as a measure of how unequal a
society is, Cingano finds that "lowering inequality by 1 Gini point
would translate in an increase in cumulative growth of 0.8 percentage
points in the following 5 years" (Cingano, 17). Thus, if productivity is
measured by GDP, then these findings would strongly suggest that a more
equal society may also be more productive.

While these findings may suggest that welfare policies promoting
equality may be positive for a nation's economy, in order to fully
understand the relationship between the welfare state and efficiency it
is important to consider the existence of market failures and the role
of governments in addressing them. If any number of the conditions for
the idealized efficient market break down, then market may produce
outcomes that are not socially optimal. This proves to be the case for
both retirement pensions and health insurance, neither of which can be
sufficiently provided by private markets. Since insurance payments
schemes are predicated upon having only a few claimants sustain damages,
they are vulnerable to unanticipated events which affect every
policyholder. Consequently, as Barr (1989) describes, private retirement
pensions are unable to protect against unknown inflation rates which
will in turn negatively impact every retiree (Barr, 70). Alternatively,
a state retirement benefit, or social security as it is commonly known,
may provided indexed government bonds which will ensure benefit
receivers are protected against inflation.

The provision of private health insurance is similarly fraught with
roadblocks to the idealized, proper function of markets, as it is
plagued by information problems and uninsurable risks (Barr, 74). As
individuals are unable to purchase perfect information, cure their
preexisting conditions, or become younger and healthier, so too will the
market be plagued by imperfect outcomes. Fortunately, the pooling of
risks through a centralized state health system can mitigate these
challenges, and produce a more efficient outcome than the market alone.
Evidently, the provision of state health coverage and retirement
benefits are typical of both a comprehensive welfare state and efficient
economic outcomes.

In fact, having a large welfare state and productive economy is not the
oxymoron it was once assumed to be, but rather makes intuitive sense
when understood through Pontusson's perspective on the "Varieties of
Capitalism" approach. By separating countries into broad "Social Market
Economies" (SME), characterized by large welfare states and social
spending, or "Liberal Market Economies" (LME), characterized by smaller
welfare states and a preference for unfettered markets, categories
Pontusson is able to examine historical trends and differences between
the two groups. Using average GDP per hour worked as a marker for
economic productivity, he finds that "despite higher taxes and a more
egalitarian distribution of income" the SME averaged 37.15 versus the
LME average of only 35.18 (11). This differential would be even greater,
had the LME laggard New Zealand been included in the figure. A similar
trend holds for economic growth, with SMEs achieving higher levels of
GDP growth from 1960-1970 and identical growth from 1980-2000.

Given this compelling data, it is still challenging to definitively
conclude the effects of the welfare state on economic efficiency. The
term "welfare states" is quite reductive, for social policies vary
considerably between nations. While there exist several useful
typologies of welfare regimes, most notably Esping-Andersen's (1990)
"Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism", even these may be insufficiently
detailed proxies for the nuances of a given nation's social policies.
Likewise, even if scholars may agree upon operational definitions for
equality or productivity, i.e. the Gini coefficient or GDP, these
definitions may fall to capture the precise meaning of these terms.
Similarly, methodological challenges remain, such as determining
causality and which trends in the model are exogenous or endogenous.

Nevertheless, given the aforementioned theoretical frameworks and
supporting data, it seems it is possible to make the qualified statement
that welfare regimes may enhance economic efficiency and inequality may
undermine productivity. Still further qualifications need to be made
however, as certain aspects of welfare regimes do create perverse
incentives. Evidence from Sweden, the archetypical example of a large
social democratic welfare state, suggests that certain aspects of their
social policy had an adverse affect on efficiency. Consider Lindbeck's
(1988) findings, which show in Sweden "in the late 1980s...people stayed
away from work for alleged sickness on an average of 26 days per year as
compared to 14 days in 1955." (Lindbeck, 1299). Then, after reforms
forced business to bear to the costs of the first two weeks of an
employee's sick leave, the number drops to only 11 days per year. This
is a textbook example of how social policies, if not properly designed
or administered, may negatively impact the economy. Governments of
social market economies should thus continue to be diligent in their
creation and expansion of programs, resisting the inertia and
self-interested bureaucratic tendency for programs to grow.

On the other hand, governments of liberal market economies would benefit
from implementing certain social policies characteristic of social
market economies, such as retirement benefits and health coverage. Yes,
poorly designed social policy may adversely affect economic conditions,
but the tacit assumption of many liberal market governments that
economic efficiency and productivity decrease as social spending and
equality increase has proven to be incorrect. Ardent libertarians or
free marketers would be wise to look up from their economic textbook and
realize that "the effects of social policy should be gauged against the
outcomes produced by actually existing capitalist economies rather than
an idealized 'free market economy'. (Pontusson, 181). Surely, even those
governments who are not be motivated by the moral egalitarian tendencies
of welfare policies should be inspired by the prospect of a more
efficient economy and a more productive society.

Works Cited

Barr, Nicholas. Social insurance as an efficiency device. Journal of
Public Policy, 9(01):59--82, 1989

Cingano, Federico. Trends in income inequality and its impact on eco-
nomic growth. OECD Publishing, 2014

Iversen, Torben. Democracy and capitalism. Oxford Handbook of Political
Economy, 2006

Korpi, Walter. Economic growth and the welfare state: leaky bucket or
irrigation system? European sociological review, 1(2):97--118, 1985

Lindbeck, Assar. Consequences of the advanced welfare state. The World
Economy, 11(1):19--38, 1988

Lindbeck, Assar. The swedish experiment. Journal of Economic Lit-
erature, 35(3):1273--1319, 1997

Okun, Arthur . Equality and efficiency: The big tradeoff. Brookings
Institution Press, 1975

Pontusson, Jonas. Inequality and prosperity: Social Europe vs. liberal
America. Cornell University Press, 2005
